JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES: We look forward
to a lot of very positive
things happening for Russia,
for the United States, and
for everybody concerned.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Face-to-face.
Conflicting reports on
what President Trump
said to President Putin
about Russian meddling
in the U.S. election, a
day after again questioning
their role, as protests
rage outside the meeting
of global leaders in Germany.
Then: rethinking public housing
-- how one Denver community
is building health into the
structure of their neighborhood
to foster a better lifestyle.
ISMAEL GUERRERO, Director,
Denver Housing Authority:
What we learned in
early conversations
with residents in particular
was, they didn't just want
a new unit to move into.
They wanted a better
quality of life.
So we really started expanding
our perspective on what we
were trying to accomplish here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
David Brooks and Ruth
Marcus take on a week
full of foreign tests for
the Trump administration.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was the most
highly anticipated meeting
yet of the Trump presidency.
For the first time since
he took office, Mr. Trump
was face-to-face with
his Russian counterpart,
Vladimir Putin.
On the agenda?
Syria, North Korea, and
Moscow's meddling in the 2016
election, about which there is
still disagreement.
From the G20 summit in Hamburg,
Germany, special correspondent
Ryan Chilcote reports.
RYAN CHILCOTE: What was planned
to last just over half-an-hour
turned into an unexpected
two hours and 15 minutes.
President Trump and
Russian President Vladimir
Putin began their much
anticipated face-to-face
by exchanging visibly friendly
greetings, given the state
of U.S.-Russia relations.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We're going to
have a talk now, and obviously
that will continue.
But we look forward to a lot of
very positive things happening
for Russia, for the United
States and for
everybody concerned.
And it's an honor
to be with you.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): I'm delighted
to be able to meet
you personally, Mr. President,
and I hope, as you said, our
meeting will yield positive
results.
RYAN CHILCOTE: News of what was
discussed came afterward from
the countries' top diplomats,
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
and Foreign Minister Sergei
Lavrov, among them, allegations
that Russia meddled
in the U.S. election.
In an audio-only briefing,
Tillerson said Mr. Trump brought
up the issue at the outset,
and said the pair had a
robust and lengthy discussion.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: The president opened
the meeting with President
Putin by raising the concerns
of the American people regarding
Russian interference in the
2016 election.
The two leaders agreed, though,
that this is a substantial
hindrance in the ability
of us to move the Russian-U.S.
relationship forward, and
agreed to exchange further work
regarding commitments of
noninterference in the
affairs of the United
States and our democratic
process, as well as
those of other countries.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Tillerson added,
Putin denied any involvement.
The Russian foreign minister
offered his own account.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through translator):
President Trump said that the
campaign is already taking on
a rather strange character,
because during the many months
that these accusations
have been aired, there
hasn't been a single fact.
President Trump has said
he's heard President
Putin's definitive
statements that is not
true, and that the
Russian leadership didn't
intervene in the election,
and that he accepts
those statements.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Yesterday, Mr.
Trump conceded Russia likely
played a role, but stopped short
of blaming them solely
for the election hack.
Tillerson today said the
Russians asked for proof of
interference, but stressed, both
leaders agreed it's
best to move on.
REX TILLERSON: The president's
rightly focused on, how do we
move forward from what may be
simply an intractable
disagreement at this point?
And I think the relationship
-- and the president
made this clear as well
-- it's too important.
And it's too important to not
find a way to move forward,
not dismissing the issue in
any way.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The two leaders
also discussed a cease-fire
plan in place for southwestern
Syria.
REX TILLERSON: I think this is
our first indication of the U.S.
and Russia being able to work
together in Syria, and as a
result of that, we had a very
lengthy discussion regarding
other areas in Syria that we
can continue to work together
on to de-escalate the areas.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Tillerson,
though, reiterated
the U.S. position that
Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad must eventually
go, something Russia
has publicly opposed.
All the while, outside today's
summit, there was no letup
in massive demonstrations.
Clashes between protesters
and police engulfed Germany's
second largest city.
Police again resorted to
water cannons and tear gas to
disperse crowds, and scores were
arrested.
German officials say more
than 100 police officers
have been injured.
Meanwhile everyone here
inside the G20 conference
center, and, by that I
mean, not just journalists,
but a lot of the G20 delegations
as well, are focused on
trying to find out as much
as they possibly can what
actually was discussed
behind closed doors
between the presidents
of the United States
and Russia -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're right,
a lot of questions, Ryan,
two hours and 20 minutes.
But, first, this
contradiction that is
apparently there, you have
the Russian foreign minister
saying that President Trump
accent President Putin's denial
about Russian metaling and
then, as we heard, Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson is
saying they just -- they are
intractably in disagreement.
So, how do we read this?
RYAN CHILCOTE: Yes,
it's an interesting one.
The straight answer is,
we really don't know
exactly what was said.
The Russian foreign minister,
as you pointed out, did indeed
say that President Trump had
accepted President
Putin's denial.
Now, I thought about this.
You could have theoretically
accept something without
concurring with the view.
But that's not
what happened here.
I listened to all of the Russian
foreign minister's comments.
I have been speaking
Russian for 28 years.
And together with a group of six
native speakers, we went through
the entire statement on the
issue.
He went much further.
He said, right, that President
Trump has also asserted in this
meeting that he hadn't heard
a single fact in the
month of allegations of
meddling in the election.
Now, how does that meddle
-- sort of fit in with what
Rex Tillerson was saying?
Well, interesting, the U.S.
secretary of state kind of gave
us some mixed signals, didn't
he?
On one the hand, he began the
press conference by saying
that President Trump had really
pressed President Putin and
pushed him on this issue, but
he also said -- and I quote
- - "The two presidents didn't
relitigate the past, that
they were committed to working
towards the future."
And it was the U.S.' position
that the best way to do that
was to try in the future to
win some kind of guarantee,
some kind of commitment
in writing from the
Russians that they wouldn't
interfere in the future in U.S.
domestic policy or elections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let
me turn you to Syria.
After the meeting, it was
announced that the two countries
have agreed on a cease-fire
for a part of Syria and
that ongoing civil war.
What do we know about
the details of that?
RYAN CHILCOTE: So, what we know
is that both the United States
and Russia have been discussing
this for some time.
It looks like most
of the agreement was
worked out in advance.
They signed a memorandum of
understanding between Russia,
the United States and Jordan
that they would have
a cease-fire that will
begin shortly in the
south in Syria, and that
there would be a plan to
de-escalate or lower, reduce the
violence in the southwest of the
country.
The secretary of state did
say that there was still a
couple more meetings that were
necessary, maybe another week
to work out the details of who
would actually be providing
security on the ground.
And I would point out that,
remember, it's not just Russia
and the United States that
have forces in Syria.
Iran does as well.
So it would be interesting
to see how they fit
into this agreement.
And I would also point out that
we have had four cease-fire
agreements before this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: True.
Ryan, finally, so many
journalists there and
others watching this
meeting today between
the Russian and
the U.S. president.
What are people taking away?
What did you take away from
this, I mean, in terms of how
they addressed -- how they
looked when they were
together, what they said?
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, the
body language was warm.
There's no doubt.
There's no questioning that.
You could really see that.
President Putin, for his part,
when he was speaking Russian,
he was very differential.
He was very polite.
He was very -- went out of
his way to be respectful,
calling President Trump
"Mr. President" as
he addressed him.
And then we heard from
Rex Tillerson say that
their chemistry was
very positive, that they
immediately, almost immediately
took to one another.
And, interestingly, I thought
he also added that no one could
stop the meeting, that several
aides peaked in through the door
to try and break up the meeting.
And at one point, they even sent
Melania Trump into the meeting
to try and break it up, and
that she too failed, and
that the two presidents,
despite everyone else's
wishes, went on talking
for another hour because they
so enjoyed the conversation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating that
they ignored the first lady's
efforts to get it to stop.
All right, Ryan Chilcote,
reporting for us from
Hamburg, Germany, thank you.
And we will hear from
Britain's defense secretary,
Michael Fallon, on Syria,
on Russia and other
issues right after
the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
U.S., Japan and South Korea
have agreed to apply -- quote
- - "maximum pressure" after
North Korea's intercontinental
ballistic missile test.
In a joint statement, they
said they will push for a U.N.
Security Council resolution
to apply new sanctions
on Pyongyang.
But if the North -- quote
-- "chooses the right path,"
the countries stand ready to
offer a brighter future.
Experts believe the
missile launched Tuesday
could reach Alaska.
And, today, North Korean
state TV broadcast a
message aimed at the U.S.
WOMAN (through translator):
North Korea makes it clear once
again that its development of
an intercontinental
ballistic rocket is an option
taken to defend itself.
The test is a gift
package addressed to
none other than the U.S.
The U.S. will receive more gift
packages as it tries harder to
destroy, by means of sanctions
and pressure, the overall
national power and strategic
position of North Korea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
U.S./Japan/South Korea
statement also called
on nations that border
North Korea to help
reduce the threat.
That is an unmistakable
reference to Pyongyang's
closest ally, China, whose
leader meets tomorrow
with President Trump.
Mr. Trump also met today
with Mexico's President
Enrique Pena Nieto, and
emphasized the importance
of renegotiating the
NAFTA trade agreement.
It was the first face-to-face
meeting between the pair since
President Trump took office.
He hailed Pena Nieto
as his friend, but said
that he absolutely still
wants Mexico to pay
for a proposed border wall
between the two countries.
In Egypt, a suicide car bombing
left at least 23 soldiers dead
on the Sinai Peninsula, the
worst attack there in years.
The Islamic State group claimed
responsibility for the incident
at a checkpoint south of
Rafah.
Meanwhile, in Iraq, ISIS
fighters are still clinging to
a shrinking pocket of territory
in Mosul.
Iraqi government forces
laid out the difficulty.
ABDUL WAHAB AL-SAADI,
Iraqi Lieutenant General
(through translator):
We are facing challenges
that slow down our operations.
And that's because the Islamic
State group is using civilians
as human shields, especially
children and women.
And that's why we advance
very slowly, because we
have to protect their lives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, the
Pentagon said that airstrikes
by the U.S.-led coalition
in Iraq and Syria have
killed a total of more
than 600 civilians.
That is since the start of the
anti-ISIS campaign in 2014.
Back in this country,
hiring surged more
than expected in June.
The Labor Department says
U.S. employers added 222,000
jobs, the most in four months.
But the unemployment rate ticked
up slightly, from 4.3 percent
to 4.4 percent, as more people
looked for work.
Analysts say the positive report
is likely to lead to another
hike in the Federal Reserve's
key interest rate.
For now, that news drove
stock prices higher
on Wall Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained 94 points
today to close at 21414.
The Nasdaq rose 63, and
the S&P 500 added 15.
For the week, all three
indexes edged up a
fraction of a percent.
U.S. Attorney General Jeff
Sessions visited the military
prison at Guantanamo Bay today.
He was joined by Deputy Attorney
General Rod Rosenstein, and
by Dan Coats, the director
of national intelligence.
Sessions has called Guantanamo
a -- quote - - "perfectly
acceptable place" for detaining
terror suspects.
A Justice Department spokesman
said that the visit was meant to
get an up-to-date understanding
of current operations.
And an influential press
freedom group is criticizing a
report by Republican senators
about leaks of
government information.
The document released yesterday
which was sent to the attorney
general says that leaks
are harming national security.
The Committee to Protect
Journalists said it
seems intended to have
a chilling effect,
and resembles measures seen
-- quote -- "more often in
authoritarian countries."
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I sit down with the United
Kingdom's defense secretary;
Republicans considering
alternatives in their fight to
replace the Affordable Care Act;
low-income housing
with a focus on healthy
living; and much more.
As part of the G20 summit this
weekend, President Trump will
meet with the United Kingdom's
prime minister, Theresa May.
They will have much to discuss,
from the fight against ISIS,
to the role of NATO, and how
their broader agendas differ
from those of European allies.
A short time ago, I spoke
with the U.K.'s defense
secretary, Sir Michael Fallon.
I began by asking him about
the differing accounts of what
Mr. Trump said to President
Putin about Russian meddling
in last year's U.S. election.
MICHAEL FALLON, U.K.
Defense Secretary: It
was an important meeting.
It was right that they should
meet reasonably early on.
It's right that they should get
along, because there's quite a
bit to talk to Russia about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You had said
earlier that the U.S. should
go into that meeting warily.
Does it sound to you as
if that's what happened?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we
have to engage with Russia.
That can't be business as usual
with Russia while the Crimea
remains annexed, while Ukraine
is being interfered with.
It can't be business as usual.
But we think it important to
have a dialogue with Russia to
try and de-escalate any tensions
that there are and to
ensure that where Russia
does have influence in
the world -- and Syria
is one example -- that
we can bring Russia's
influence to bear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you work
very closely obviously with
the intelligence community.
We know that President
Trump has challenged the
intelligence community
-- the U.S. intelligence
community's reporting on Russian
interference in the election.
What effect might that have
on Russia and its continuing
efforts to interfere here in
the U.S. and in Europe?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we
know Russia intervened in
some elections in Europe.
That, we do know, in
the Dutch referendum,
in the French elections.
There's been an attempted coup
in Montenegro that Russia was
suspected of being involved
in.
So, we know there's been
this pattern of behavior
by Russia in recent years.
But I'm not able to
comment on what happened
here in your election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But to the
extent President Trump is
challenging the work of the U.S.
community, does that
have an effect on
intelligence work abroad,
internationally, cooperation
between the U.S. and
allies like the U.K.?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well,
there's no closer cooperation
on intelligence than
between us and the United
States.
Our services work extremely
closely together, both
in monitoring what
Russia is doing, but
also against terrorism.
So it's a very close
relationship to us.
It's very important to us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let
me turn to Syria.
We're told the two
presidents did discuss Syria.
And, in fact, after their
meeting, it was reported that
they have agreed on a cease-fire
for a section of
southwestern Syria.
What do you know about that?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well
any cease-fire has got
to be good news in the
civil war that's gone
on are for so long now.
But there's been many
cease-fires before that
have turned out not to
be cease-fires at all.
And we have seen up in Aleppo
in the north of Syria, we have
seen Russia allowing Syria
to go on bombing its
own civilians, bombing
hospitals after a cease-fire
has been declared.
Now, this one is welcome, but
it has got to be enforced, it's
got to be an actual cease-fire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
what do you look for?
What's the evidence of that?
You want to see when it
takes effect and what
the ground rules are?
MICHAEL FALLON: Yes.
We want to see it applied to
those on the ground, so that
we can get humanitarian aid
into those towns and
villages that have been
cut off in the fighting.
We can get aid through.
And we need to be
absolutely sure that it
really is a cease-fire.
But let's hope this one sticks
and brings some peace to that
part of Syria down in the
southwestern corner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Can a cease-fire
make a difference, though, when
the two sides disagree about
whether President Assad
should stay in power?
The U.S. has said that
it wants him removed.
The Russians are still
saying they want him to stay.
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we
don't see any long-term
future for Assad in Syria.
This is a man who has attacked
his own people, who has
barrel-bombed his own people.
He's used chemical weapons
against his own people.
We don't think he can be part of
the long-term future of Syria.
But what we do want to see
happening is the - - is all
those parties that are prepared
to work to a more democratic
Syria working together now to
bring about a new settlement.
And we're encouraging
the Russia-sponsored
process in Astana and
the other negotiations
that are going in Geneva
to bring those together
and see if everybody
can get around the table
now and plot a different
future for Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But can there be
progress of any kind, whether
it's a cease-fire or some
other sort of step forward
together, when the two sides
still disagree over Mr. Assad
and his future?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well,
there is disagreement, yes.
We don't think he can be part of
the long-term future of Syria.
But we do want to see the
political process get under way
that will lead Syria to a more
plural kind of government that
is genuinely representative
of all the different groupings
in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about another troubled part of
the world, and that is North
Korea.
We know that you and U.S.
Defense Secretary James
Mattis discussed that.
What can you tell us?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well,
it's a problem not just
for the United States.
Obviously, the United
States is coming within
range of these missiles.
But what the North Koreans
have done is something illegal.
It's something provocative.
And it's unacceptable.
And we have now got to respond
as an international community,
not just the United States.
It's not right the United
States has to bear this
problem on its own.
We have got to work much harder
now through the United Nations
to see whether the sanctions
that have already been applied
are working properly, to
consider additional sanctions,
and, thirdly, to bring more
pressure to bear on China to
get the kind of changes that we
need in that regime.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
know, President Trump has been
tweeting a lot about this.
He said the other day words to
the effect it looks like that
what the Chinese did hasn't
had any effect, they're still
trading with North Korea.
Are these kinds of
comments helpful?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we all
have to, I think, step back now
and see and look very carefully
at what has worked and
what has not worked.
We have had seven United
Nations resolution.
Clearly, a nuclear program of
this kind can't have been put
together without access to the
raw materials, the
components involved, and
indeed to the finance
that you need to construct
them, to put it all together.
So, clearly, the sanctions may
have been breached, and we need
to look at them, see where those
gaps are in the sanctions,
and whether a new resolution
can impose a tougher regime on
North Korea or indeed on any
other companies and individuals,
Chinese or otherwise, who
may have been helping them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there
agreement between the U.S.,
U.K. and other nations with the
same interests on what
should come next with
regard to North Korea?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, there is
agreement that, first of all, we
have to work this diplomatically
and economically through
sanctions, that we have to raise
the price of what the North
Koreans are doing to deter
them from carrying out
further tests in future.
There's agreement
amongst us on that.
And we're all working hard on
that at the United Nations in
New York to move that agreement
forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With all due
respect, though, there have
been sanctions in place.
MICHAEL FALLON: There has been
sanctions, and some clearly
have not been enforced.
And we need to look at that.
And then we need to look and
see whether a new, tougher
resolution is required.
And we will be looking at that
in the European Union framework
as well over in Europe to
see who may have been trading
with North Korea and so on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Russians
and the Chinese have proposed
that the North Koreans freeze
their missile program, their
nuclear program, in exchange
for which the South Koreans and
the United States would stop
or pull back on these joint
military exercises and remove
the THAAD missile
defense system.
Is that any sort of
a realistic proposal?
MICHAEL FALLON: No, because
it's a false comparison.
Military exercises or missile
defense, these are legitimate
things for nations to have
and to do.
What North Korea is
doing is illegal.
It's completely illegal
under the treaties,
under international law.
It's a breach of United
Nations resolutions.
And you can't compare it with
military exercises in the South.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One other thing
I do want to ask you about,
that is, President Trump's
theme yesterday.
He spoke to the Polish
people in Warsaw.
And he spoke about the threat
to Western civilization.
He talked about it being
at a risk of decline.
And he asked if the West
has the will to survive.
Is this the sort of language
that you think is going to bring
the Western allies together
in their fight
against extremism?
MICHAEL FALLON: We do have
values in common in the West.
And we do need to speak
up for those values
and to remember them.
We're being attacked in the
West, not because those values
have failed, but because we have
been successful and we
have spread some of those
values around the world.
So, that was an important
message yesterday.
And it was coupled, of course,
with a reminder that the United
States stands behind Article
5 of the NATO treaty
that believes in the
collective defense of NATO.
If one of us is attacked,
then the others must
come to its help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sir Michael
Fallon, Britain's defense
secretary, thank you very much.
MICHAEL FALLON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aside from the
many international issues before
President Trump this week, his
first major push on domestic
policy is facing an uphill
climb in the Senate.
John Yang has this checkup.
JOHN YANG: When last we left
the saga of the Republicans'
attempt to repeal and replace
the Affordable Care Act,
Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell didn't have
the votes for the Senate
bill, so lawmakers headed home
for the Fourth of July recess.
Where do things stand
as the recess ends?
Let's turn to our
own Lisa Desjardins.
So, Lisa, has this week off
helped or hurt McConnell's
efforts to get this bill passed?
LISA DESJARDINS: It has not
helped, and that has hurt.
We see some Republicans who
are not usually in the middle
of these situations, like John
Hoeven of North Dakota, for
example, meeting not just with
constituents, but with hospital
administrators, those
kinds of people.
And he came away with those
meetings having, stressing
problems with the bill.
Then, yesterday, Mitch
McConnell, the majority
leader, spoke to a
rotary club in Kentucky.
And he said this quote that
got a lot of attention:
"If my side is unable
to agree on an adequate
replacement, then some kind
of action with regard to the
private health insurance market
must occur.
No action is not
an alternative."
His office insists he said
things like this before,
but the timing is key.
This was a bill that was
supposed to be voted on already.
John, leadership sources tell
me they would still like a new
revised bill next week, maybe
a vote the following week.
But that seems unclear now
if it will really happen.
JOHN YANG: Seems like Mitch
McConnell was sending a message.
So, who are the key players that
he was sending that message to?
LISA DESJARDINS: You
got it exactly right.
We talked so much
about moderates before.
Now it's all about
the conservatives.
He was saying to conservatives,
we have to revise these bills,
or we have lost our shot
of having anything
as Republicans.
Let's compare two conservatives
who spoke in town halls
yesterday's sound bites, first
from Texas Senator Ted Cruz.
SEN.
TED CRUZ (R), Texas: 2010,
2014, and 2016, repealing
Obamacare was front and center.
Now, I recognize that some folks
may not agree with that, but
the voters, repealing Obamacare
was the single biggest factor
producing a Republican House,
a Republican Senate, and
I think ultimately a
Republican president.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, that's
an animated Ted Cruz.
He is trying to change this
revised bill to try and get
it across the finish line.
But compare that with
Kansas Senator Jerry Moran.
SEN.
JERRY MORAN (R),
Kansas: I believe in the
legislative process that
allows public debate,
public discussions,
testimony, amendments
offered by all senators.
The bill comes to the Senate
floor, amendments offered by all
senators, and figure out where
there are 60 votes to pass
something that is so important
to so many Americans.
LISA DESJARDINS: How about
that key number, 60 votes?
That means Democrats would
need to be to be involved.
And that's coming
from a conservative.
JOHN YANG: So, what
are the options?
What can Mitch McConnell try
to do to get the votes he needs
to pass a bill in the Senate?
LISA DESJARDINS: There are no
easy options left, but there
are three options that seem
to define the possible paths
right now for Mr. McConnell.
The first is to revise the bill.
That's what we have
been talking about.
They do hope to offer
a revised bill soon.
But can it get enough votes?
Unclear.
The second is a full repeal.
That's something Rand
Paul and Ted Cruz want.
However, with that full repeal
would come a replacement later.
And many of my sources
in the Republican Party
say that is too risky.
JOHN YANG: It's also an
option that the president
raised last week.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's correct.
But this doesn't seem
to have the votes right
now in the Senate.
Then the third option would be
smaller fixes to the Affordable
Care Act, something that
stabilizes the market
and fixes what people
think are problems now.
That would involve
the Democrats as well.
JOHN YANG: That would keep ACA
essentially as it this, just
make little nicks and cuts
around the edges.
LISA DESJARDINS: Potentially.
It would be a much smaller
bill at that point.
JOHN YANG: That's what
the Democrats want.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JOHN YANG: So, as we sit here,
with the Senate about to come
back next week, what are the
odds?
What are the chances?
What does your gut tell you
about the chances of, A, the
Senate passing something and, if
that happens, B, getting
something to the president's
desk for his signature?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, I have
the sense that almost no one
knows exactly what's going to
happen now, but I would say,
given that and given the way
the Senate works, the odds are
long, both on a bill passing
the Senate and even longer on
it getting to the president's
desk, as things stand right now.
JOHN YANG: But the odds are
good you're going to have a busy
week next week, when the Senate
comes back.
LISA DESJARDINS: I think so.
JOHN YANG: Thanks, Lisa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
David Brooks and Ruth
Marcus give their take
on the president's
meeting with Vladimir Putin;
and a linguistic professor's
defense of social media.
But first: an experiment in
rethinking public housing that
encourages healthier living by
changing the larger
environment for residents.
Jeffrey Brown
reports from Denver.
JEFFREY BROWN: At age 71, Noel
Taylor says she's become more
active and health-conscious
than ever before.
NOEL TAYLOR, Denver: Every
year, I improve my diet,
I improve my exercise.
JEFFREY BROWN: Her
change in behavior didn't
happen by accident.
Four years ago, here in
downtown Denver, Taylor
joined an experiment in
making healthy living
part of the design
and daily life of a
public housing project.
Among the amenities here,
access to a garden plot.
NOEL TAYLOR: I noticed,
all summer long, I
was getting healthier.
The more of my own
vegetables I was eating,
the more energy I had.
It's made a huge difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this sounds
all too good to be true.
NOEL TAYLOR: I know.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And there's more.
The Denver Botanic Gardens
hosts a farmers market giving
away free produce to residents.
WOMAN: We're going to talk about
how to shop healthy on a budget.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another group
offers classes on healthy
recipes and shopping.
MAN: Now we will take
your blood pressure.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a
clinic on the ground
floor of one building,
public health physicians
schedule regular visits
to do routine checkups.
There's a light rail stop, both
for easy transportation and to
get residents out of their cars.
MAN: Do the other side now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Plus,
bike rentals and a nearby
shop to teach kids how
to maintain their bikes.
Even the architecture and public
art was designed to encourage
residents to get outside and
take a walk.
ISMAEL GUERRERO, Director,
Denver Housing Authority: We
really wanted this to look like
a neighborhood,
not a development.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ismael Guerrero,
director of the Denver Housing
Authority, says that, 10
years ago, this was a high-crime
neighborhood, with 250 units
of rundown public housing.
Something had to be done.
ISMAEL GUERRERO: What we
learned in early conversations
with residents in particular
was, they didn't just want
a new unit to move into.
They wanted a better
quality of life.
So we really started expanding
our perspective on what we
were trying to accomplish here.
JEFFREY BROWN: The result
completed earlier this summer
is the Mariposa development, a
mixture of 800 apartments and
town homes, one-third public
housing, a third subsidized,
and a third rented
at market value.
The overall cost was
$150 million; $60 million
came from federal, state
and local government
programs, with the rest coming
through private investment.
Already, Mariposa is
becoming a model for
rethinking public housing.
ISMAEL GUERRERO: Part of it is
physical health, and part of
it is what we call neighborhood
health.
Right?
How healthy is the place?
Is it safe?
Are there healthy
activities for you to do?
Is there healthy food
in the neighborhood
for you to go and eat?
Is there a healthy economy
where people can get jobs
and start a business?
JEFFREY BROWN: The Osage
Cafe, located in one of the
apartment buildings, is designed
to meet some of those needs.
In addition to the food, it
provides culinary training and
internships for young people
in the neighborhood, like
20-year-old Israel Trejo.
ISRAEL TREJO, Denver: And I
think that's where I discovered
I had a passion for cooking.
JEFFREY BROWN: What
did it give you?
ISRAEL TREJO: It gave me
the entire world, basically.
Like, with the skills
that I have learned now,
I could go anywhere.
I could go be anything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Trejo now has
a job at one of Denver's top
restaurants, and plans to
operate his own food truck soon.
ANGELA RODRIGUEZ, Denver:
Are you looking forward to
helping me grow some fruits and
vegetables?
JEFFREY BROWN: Angela Rodriguez,
a single mother of two teens,
dreams of one day buying
her own home.
She has a full-time job at a
nearby community college, but
Denver's booming housing market
makes ownership difficult.
She lives in a subsidized town
home at Mariposa, which she
says is very different from the
old-style projects
she grew up in nearby.
ANGELA RODRIGUEZ: As a new
style of public housing, it did
take me a little bit of time
for the adjustment.
When new tenants are
mingling with other tenants
that come from different
walks of life, it's
helping us to develop into new
perspectives of modern living.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rodriguez
uses public transportation,
has taken up gardening,
and has fully embraced
the culture of health
that is promoted here.
But is Mariposa working?
It's too early for
definitive answers.
According to a 2015 study by the
Denver Public Health Department,
about half the residents
had participated in
health-related activities
over the previous three years.
But the study also showed the
amount of exercise residents
pursued had changed little.
Just over a third said they
exercised five times a week.
About the same amount said they
exercised one to four times
a week, and 26 percent said
they rarely or never exercised.
Smoking rates decreased, but
only slightly, from 30 percent
of residents down to 24 percent.
And these so-called active
staircases, designed
with a bit of whimsy...
ISMAEL GUERRERO: It's a way
to engage kids, and actually
now the adults enjoy it.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... to
lure residents away
from using the elevator.
Well, so far, they're
not having a big impact.
THERESA MICKIEWICZ, Denver
Public Health: We actually did
observational counts, where
we sat there and we counted
people who used the stairs vs.
people who used the elevator,
and we compared it
against a control
staircase in the Mariposa
redevelopment, and we found
absolutely no difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: Theresa
Mickiewicz, an epidemiologist
with Denver Public
Health, is overseeing a
study of the development.
And while major improvements in
health remain to be seen, she
believes something important
is happening here, and
she expects the numbers
to reflect that soon.
THERESA MICKIEWICZ: While
maintaining my objectivity
as an evaluator, do
I think that there is
value in this type of project?
I would say yes.
Individually, these components
have been shown in the evidence,
in literature, to improve
health outcomes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The city
of Denver is so confident
in this new model,
it's about to embark on
a similar development
that will be three times
larger than Mariposa.
That construction is expected
to begin later next year.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown,
reporting from Denver.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, another
look at the major news of this
week, both foreign and domestic,
from today's pivotal meeting
between two presidents,
to new developments
with the Senate GOP's
health care plan.
Here to provide analysis
of all that and more
is Brooks and Marcus.
That's New York Times columnist
David Brooks and Ruth Marcus,
deputy editorial page editor
for The Washington Post.
Mark Shields is away this week.
Welcome to you on both.
So, the lead story today,
of course, President Trump
meets President Putin.
David, all eyes on this
meeting, the body language,
what did they say.
And then we have these
conflicting reports
coming out afterwards.
What do we make of it?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it
was sort of normal for a
Trump administration event.
He did raise the meddling
issue, which is a good thing.
And so it seemed a little
like, from the talking
points, they hit Syria,
they hit all the prints
a U.S. president would talk
to with a Russian president.
It seemed a bit like a normal
meeting, which is a good thing.
The abnormal part to me is how
small it was, that there are
only four people and then the
two translators in the room,
no H.R. McMaster, no national
security adviser, which is an
oddity.
And that gives them maximum
flexibility to say whatever
they want in the room and not
have it reported
out of the room.
And that's what makes the point
about what they were saying
about the meddling or anything
else totally mysterious.
Apparently, there were no
note-takers in the room.
And so it leaves a big
void in what they actually
said and whether Trump
really accepted the
fact that Putin claims
he didn't meddle.
And so it's just a big void
that wouldn't exist if you
had the normal complement of
people in the room and the
normal note-takers in the room,
and you had some actual look
into what sort of what
was happening in there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A long meeting,
Ruth, but a lot of questions.
RUTH MARCUS: Long meeting,
a lot of questions.
And normal is not the
way I would describe it.
And I think I should start by
the way President Trump started
with Vladimir Putin, which is,
it's an honor to be
here with both of you.
That is a true honor.
I thought for President Trump
to say -- and I understand we
have diplomatic niceties -- it
wasn't an honor to be with
someone who has attacked and
jailed dissidents and killed
dissidents in his country, who
has invaded other countries,
and who has tried to interfere
in an American election.
And I think that simply to
accept that, oh, it's great,
at least he raised the question
of Russian interference, but
we don't know - - and never
will probably -- precisely what
he said, is really defining
the presidency down.
That should have been a given
that he was going to raise that.
And that it wasn't a given,
they left but on tenterhooks,
and that the day before, he
was still saying, well, nobody
really knows for sure what
happened, and seemed more eager
to blame President Obama
for not doing enough,
to question whether the
intelligence community
gets it right, to tweet
today about John Podesta,
Hillary Clinton's campaign
chairman, and say,
why didn't he turn over
the server, just really
underscores to me the
abnormality of the situation.
DAVID BROOKS: I have
successfully defined
deviancy so far down...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
RUTH MARCUS: Well, that's the
point of normalizing, right?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, that's fair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But,
David, was using the
term honor going too far?
DAVID BROOKS: I think no
normal person would say that.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But, on the
other hand, I'm willing to give
diplomatic latitude to that.
There are a lot of people in a
lot of diplomatic circumstances.
And I'm sure, if we went
back and looked at how other
presidents speak, you're trying
to establish a relationship
with a bad guy.
Now, and you say things.
And so I give
latitude toward that.
The question is whether
Donald Trump recognizes that
Vladimir Putin is a bad guy.
That's the larger question
here than whether he
used the word honor.
And I guess there's no
indication that he regards
Putin as in any way a bad guy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it matter,
Ruth, whether the president
accepted Putin's denials?
Or are we just -- we're
going to be left wondering
about this forever.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, Secretary
of State Tillerson said that
they basically agreed it didn't
make sense to relitigate
this, actually one
of my favorite words.
And maybe that's true.
The important point is that,
since before the election,
Donald Trump has been denying
that this happened.
He has seemed entirely
unconcerned with figuring
out whether it happened
and with expressing
the outrage that any
American president should be
expressing that it did happen.
And now I think we're supposed
to be satisfied that there is
this joint working group on
cyber-security.
So, I have a modest proposal.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: If we're going to
have a joint working group on
cyber-security, let's combine
that with the election fraud
commission, and we can really
get to the bottom of everything.
DAVID BROOKS: Say we
had a normal president.
It's actually an interesting
political problem.
What do you do with Russia?
Do you say, you interfered
with our elections,
you're interfering with
all these elections
across Europe, we're not dealing
with you until you behave by
some standards of normalcy?
And that's a morally
satisfying position that, as
a columnist, would be fun.
But there are actually a
lot of issues you have got
to deal with Russia on.
And so this is perpetually the
problem with rogue regimes.
You have got to -- you
deal with them and then
you don't deal with them.
And even if we had a
normal administration,
it would be tough to know
how to treat Vladimir
Putin.
RUTH MARCUS: And this is
my time to now say that
David has a fair point.
And so, sure, whenever you're
dealing with somebody who is
an adversary -- and Russia
is an adversary -- you are
going to have to calibrate,
because there are things that we
need their help on.
We need their help on Syria.
We need their help
on North Korea.
And so you don't want to let one
little attack on your democracy
and your election system
blow everything up.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: But you do need to
assert yourself in a way that
we haven't seen him do publicly
and that we're going to
still have questions about
whether he did privately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of our democracy, yesterday,
in Poland, David, the president
made a speech to
the Polish people.
And he talked about Western
civilization and how it's under
siege, and how it's going to
matter right now whether
we have the will to survive
the siege that we are under.
Does this ring true?
Does it feel like
Western civilization is
under siege right now?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think --
I 80 percent liked the speech.
There was this famous clash
of civilization thesis from
Samuel Huntington, a political
theorist.
And the idea was that Western
civilization is at war with
Islam and maybe some of the
other civilizations
around the world.
And I don't agree with that.
But I do think there is such a
thing as Western civilization.
I think it starts with
the Greeks and the Romans.
Then it goes through the
Enlightenment -- or the
Reformation, the Enlightenment.
It goes through
the scientific age.
And it somewhat defines some
of the cultures and mores of
Europe and North America and
some other countries.
And it's obviously absorbed
a lot of immigrants and
it's absorbed a lot of
ideas and had exchange
with Asia and other
civilizations.
But it's a thing.
And I like the fact that
he appealed to that,
especially when he's
trying to, I hope, reunify
the Western alliance, which
has been a powerful force for
good in the world over the last
70 years.
And, to his credit, he
appealed to some of the
things that are finest
about Western civilization,
artistic creativity, rights of
minorities, equality for woman.
He ran down the list.
Whether the guy actually lives
by those standards is another
matter, but at least he appealed
to them.
And I think it's a big mistake
any time anybody makes an appeal
to the West or to America,
to patriotism to think,
oh, he's excluding.
It's an identity formation.
And we need our
identity formations.
And I think he did
it, in the speech at
least, reasonably well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
do you read that?
RUTH MARCUS: Well,
I'm not at 80 percent.
Surprise.
But there are things to
like about the speech.
One thing to like about the
speech is that, unlike the
last time he was in Europe, he
was -- and cut the words out
of the speech, we learned
later, he was able to at least
read from the teleprompter
that he supports Article 5, the
fundamental provision of NATO
for common self-defense.
On the other hand, last time,
when he was in Saudi Arabia,
he was able to not say the
words radical Islamic terrorism.
I will give you Article
5, but I need my radical
Islamic terrorism.
I think it was very nice
to hear the summoning
of the importance of
a free press and all
those things.
A little hard to take from
somebody who had just tweeted
out that CNN beat-up wrestling
video.
And so that brings me to
my fundamental concern,
which is, which are we
paying attention to,
teleprompter Trump or
off-the-cuff tweeter Trump?
Both matter, right, his
willingness to say things.
I was a little more put off
by the Western part of the
invocation of common values and
democratic values that
we should all live by.
But teleprompter
Trump is one thing.
But I think, when we see
the real Trump, it's a
lot more nervous-making,
to say the least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do we know
which one is the real Trump?
DAVID BROOKS: No.
I take Ruth's point.
But you remember Angela Merkel
had given this - - made this
comment about Europe has to go
it alone, because we
don't about this guy.
And so this appeal to a
Western cohesion to me
was a valuable thing.
The second thing is -- and
this is something Trump does
better than a lot of his critics
- - he understands
sense of belonging.
And a lot of people think
globalization, any time you make
any particularity, you're sort
of offending some other group.
And a lot of people in this
country think they belong to
America anymore, and he at
least appeals to some
sense of belonging.
I like the idea that we belong
to Western traditions, so
I'm glad he appeals to that
sort of thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
We're going to -- we could talk
about this for a long time.
But I do want to bring us back
to something that we heard
Lisa Desjardins reporting on,
Ruth, and that is the
health care, Republican
health care plan.
She -- by her reporting, it
sounds like that Republicans
are having a tougher time than
ever now getting the votes they
need to get something through.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, Senate
Majority Mitch McConnell
has been talking about
this as a Rubik's Cube.
But with the Rubik's Cube,
you know there's a solution.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: With this
one, not so clear.
And what I loved this week was
that McConnell, who is I think
absolutely dedicated to trying
to find the votes, and --
which wasn't totally clear.
Maybe he just wanted to get
this put aside, so we can move
on to tax cuts, which they
really care about.
And no one discounts
his ability.
If anybody could do it, he can.
But he brought out the
big guns this week,
threatening the ultimate
sanction, bipartisanship.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: If you guys don't
go along, I'm going to have
to work with Democrats, and
then you will see how unhappy
you will be with the result.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
What's the opposite
of a nuclear option?
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: It's
the talking option.
DAVID BROOKS: Like, we will
do something good, right?
We will do something good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh, my God,
we may have to work together.
What does it look like?
DAVID BROOKS: I agree
with Ruth on this.
It looks dead.
It just like -- not only have
you begun to see the burbling
concerns, and then out in
some of the few town halls
that have been out there,
you have seen those concerns.
But you're beginning to see all
these members come freelancing
off in different elections.
Ted Cruz is freelancing
from that direction.
Mike Lee is staking out a
position that will be completely
unacceptable to a lot of people.
And then the moderates are
staking out their position.
So, not only is it hard to
piece together this together.
They're all going further apart.
And so they're all
defending themselves.
And it's just -- the party
is not cohesive enough, so
I think there's no solution.
It's super hard to take away a
benefit that is pretty deeply
embedded now, no matter what
your ideology is.
And to me -- and it's a genuine
question -- what do we do?
McConnell made the correct
point that you can't just do
nothing, because the markets,
the insurance markets
are struggling.
And so something has to be
done, some normal repair
at least has to be done.
How do we do that?
Can we really imagine
a bipartisan solution?
Frankly, I cannot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
conservatives can't imagine it
would go along with shoring up
the current system.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, it's going
to take a long time to get
to a bipartisan solution.
And I want to kind of lay out
the possibility that there are
ways in which you could cobble
this together.
You say, OK, some of
these tax cuts for the
rich don't have to go.
There's all sorts
of other things.
But that's going
to have to fail.
There are people working,
Lamar Alexander, Susan Collins.
Democrats are working with them
on this that - - and there are
ways to shore up the markets.
We have had a learning curve on
the Affordable Care Act, which
kind of suggests two things.
People like it, and it needs
some tinkering that are most
-- that's mostly around the
edges.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we want
to leave this on a positive
note, so we're going to stop
right there.
And by next Friday,
we will know more.
Ruth Marcus, David
Brooks, thank you both.
RUTH MARCUS: Thanks.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally
tonight: Linguist Deborah
Tannen has written a new
book on women's friendships,
"You're the Only
One I Can Tell."
And, tonight, she offers
her Humble Opinion on the
new language of liking.
DEBORAH TANNEN, Author, "You're
the Only One I Can Tell:
Inside the Language of Women's
Friendships": For a book about
friendship, I interviewed
over 80 women, ages 9 to 97,
and heard a lot of worry
that people are getting
more self-absorbed,
constantly texting and
posting pictures of trivial
things, like plates of food.
One woman complained: "I
don't care what somebody
had for dinner, all this
stuff out there that
nobody needs to know."
I'm a linguistics professor,
so you might think I would
lament the effects of social
media, especially how
it corrupts language.
But I don't.
I have spent my career studying
the language of everyday
conversation, and I know that
most everyday talk isn't about
information we need to know.
It's about staying connected
to the people we care about.
And that's a need
that social media is
extremely well-suited to.
My students at Georgetown
University have helped me
understand how this works.
They like each other's
pictures to show they're
paying attention, like
nodding and saying
uh-huh when a friend is talking.
And they use tagging to link
their pictures to their friends'
accounts, drawing friends
into their circle.
A student in my class explained
that a photo of bowls of food
and glasses of wine might
seem to scream, look at me
and this cool party I had.
But tagging the friends who
brought the food and drink to
the party was a way to thank
them for helping make the party
a success, and to remind them
of the time they all spent
together.
Surely, selfies are
self-indulgent, you might think.
But the way my students
use them, they aren't,
at least not if they
observe selfie etiquette.
For example, a selfie usually
includes at least one other
person, so the one taking
it isn't really
focusing on herself.
And she shows she doesn't
take herself too seriously by
mugging and adding captions that
are funny or self-deprecating,
or, preferably, both.
I think of social media
as an extension of
the how-was-your-day
conversations that let
you know someone cares
about you, so you feel
less alone in the world.
It's not that I don't
see downsides, but those
are also extensions of
liabilities that have
always been with us.
For example, seeing what your
friends and family are doing
when you're not there can
make you feel
included or left out.
Social media haven't
transformed human relations.
They have intensified them.
While that means ramping up some
of the stresses and frailties
of friendships, it also gives
us new, more immediate, more
creative ways to stay connected
to the people we care about,
who care about us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And thank
you to Deborah Tannen.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: With more than 31,000
miles of new and planned energy
pipelines in the U.S.,
landowners are increasingly
facing off against
developers who are claiming
land through eminent domain.
We visit Pennsylvania, where
a family and other activists
have parked themselves in
tree houses to stop construction
of a pipeline on their land.
That and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And coming up this evening
on PBS is "Washington Week."
Robert Costa is
preparing right now.
Bob, what's on tap?
ROBERT COSTA: Well, tonight:
President Trump tries to thaw
U.S. relations with Russia,
despite political heat at home.
Did it work?
Plus, how Trump's America-first
approach is disrupting the
so-called world order -- all
tonight on "Washington
Week," Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
we will be watching.
Tomorrow on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend," a report from Seattle,
where police are working to
reduce their use of force and
to rebuild community trust.
On the "NewsHour" all of
next week, correspondent
Nick Schifrin brings us
an in-depth look inside
Vladimir Putin's Russia.
NARRATOR: In Russia today,
resurgent nationalism.
MAN: And authoritarianism
is organic.
It's not artificial.
NARRATOR: Built by
and around one man.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russians told
pollsters that suddenly they
felt like a superpower again.
NARRATOR: But for
Putin's opponents:
WOMAN: People who have tried
to leave the Putin family
voluntarily have not fared very
well.
NARRATOR: A rare look inside
Putin's Russia all next
week on the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and we
will see you soon.